The web has had a profound impact on society since its introduction over 25 years ago (Amichai-Hamburger and Hayat 2001; Bargh and McKenna 2004; Benkler 2006; Castells 2011; DiMaggio et al. 2001; Graham and Dutton 2014). Changes continue to affect social interactions, economies, transportation and the workplace. But while digital-era governance continues to emerge, and in some respects has been a genuinely transformative with a paradigmatic shift away from traditional governance forms (Dunleavy et al. 2006), the record of the impact of ICTs on the practices of governments is mixed (Lips 2014). This is certainly true for the adoption of technology platforms in governments designed to promote knowledge sharing and collaboration. 

We have explored one of these collaboration platforms – GitHub – with a view to better understanding the practice of open collaboration in Canadian public administration. On the (inter)face of it, the prognosis is not promising. When it is understood, GitHub is still resisted by all but the most technically savvy. With a peculiar terminology and work model that presupposes a familiarity with command line computer operations and the language of software coding, using GitHub presents many barriers to the novice user. But while it is tempting to dismiss GitHub, as it currently exists, as ill-suited as an open collaboration tool to support document writing, reflections on its use to date do provide a useful vehicle for considering the state of open collaboration in the Canadian public sector. 

GitHub was not designed to be a general-purpose public sector collaboration tool, but its popularity in the free and open source software movement has generated attention and some experimentation. This attention gives rise to a dissonance, between the rapid growth of GitHub as a platform for collaborative software development and the comparable dearth of alternative uses for GitHub despite promotion of that idea from various quarters. Even where they agree on the ends of knowledge sharing and collaboration, there emerges a dichotomy between supporters of the specific tool and supporters of the general principles of open collaboration who question whether this is the right tool. 

While it is important for public sector managers to be aware of GitHub’s limitations, we stress that the current interface and model do not constrain what it may be able to accomplish in the future. While we lament the ungainliness of the GitHub user experience, we also see great potential in the fundamental change that the underlying Git architecture presents. GitHub is not just the dominant code-hosting platform on the Internet. It also represents a new approach to collaboration that might have profound effects on our governing institutions and governance settings. Knowledge sharing and collaboration within institutions — facilitated by web platforms — are often promoted as valued qualities of the knowledge organization, yet barriers to sharing knowledge and absent pathways for collaboration limit the ability of people inside organizations to connect with each other. In such an environment, the accountability traces built into GitHub are a significant feature and could have profound implications for performance management in a knowledge organization. If individual public servants were recognized for their contributions in collaborative efforts, their incentives to contribute would increase. The fact that GitHub allows for knowledge to be repurposed and added to should also help in building the knowledge organization. The backend data capture and distributed version control provides a clear record of policy development where much value is lost during the transitory process. The deep history of marginal notes and the disappearance of tracked changes on Word document that is lost with paper copies can be captured through a robust version control system, identifying clearly who changed what when and why. These strengths of GitHub – its openness, transparency, versioning and accountability – are the core of its value. These are the features that, for us, redeem GitHub as a collaboration platform despite some of the limitations noted here. 

What is most striking to us is the potential impact such a revised model of working could have on the hierarchical nature of governments. Public institutions are models of hierarchy and those structures have created cultures that reflect this. Attempts to integrate new collaboration and knowledge sharing approaches will face barriers from prevailing cultural norms within institutions (McNutt 2014). Where these attempts are successful, these new approaches will serve to disrupt those cultures. If any member of an organization can issue a pull request on any open document, can fork any repo and repurpose knowledge towards a new direction, true knowledge organizations can start to flourish. Such a change in the culture and conduct of governments would be revolutionary. GitHub is currently a limited interface to this new world, but it is possible that the model that GitHub introduces may be capable of lighting the spark required for such a dramatic change. 

We don’t claim that GitHub is as important an innovation as the interlinked system of servers and documents browsable on the Web that Berners-Lee envisioned twenty-five years ago. But because Git changes the nature of how collaboration and knowledge sharing can happen, and GitHub expands Git’s usability, we think it is something that public sector organizations should be paying attention to. And because GitHub is as exotic today as the World Wide Web seemed over twenty five years ago, we need to remind ourselves that we are in the early days of this new approach to open collaboration.
