#Context: Explaining GitHub
GitHub is principally used for hosting collaborative software development projects (Bell and Beer 2015) though is being applied for a range of digital project purposes in recent years (Lawson 2013; McMillan 2013b). As the number of users grows, and as users experiment with new applications of its platform, the purposes for which GitHub is used have expanded to include a range of digital products (Begel, Bosch and Storey 2013), expanding to collaborative writing purposes variously referred to as text, documents or prose. 

GitHub is certainly not the most intuitive open access platform currently being used for document collaboration, with wikis (Kasemvilas and Olfman 2009; Kittur and Kraut 2008), collaborative document platforms (Kai-Wai Chu and Kennedy 2011; Lee and Kwak 2012; Srba 2010), shared file servers (von Lucke and Große 2014) and enterprise social networking services informally referred to as ‘Facebook for the enterprise’ (Fulk and Yuan 2013; Panahi, Watson and Partridge 2013; Turban, Bolloju and Liang 2011) being the most obvious examples. Such open collaboration platforms offer the potential for diverse contributors to participate in the shared development of effective and innovative outputs (Boudreau and Lakhani 2013; Bos et al. 2007; Forte and Lampe 2013). With GitHub there are user experience barriers that challenge its easy adoption in non-technical environments (Steinmacher et al. 2015a; Steinmacher et al. 2015b), with some particular jargon that can be challenging for the novice user. However, with approximately 10 million registered users working on over 24 million projects (as of mid 2015), GitHub is the largest hosting platform of its type and is a tool that public sector managers should understand. 

##GitHub Terminology
GitHub provides a web interface for the distributed version control system and source code management protocol Git (http://git-scm.com/). While Git is the system upon which GitHub operates, GitHub provides additional usability through a graphical user interface that automates some functions normally controlled through command line entries, has social networking and project management features designed to enhance the capacity of users to work together (Storey et al. 2014), interface features that lower the technical barriers to entry for new users and provides cloud-based storage for public and private project spaces (Begel, Bosch and Storey 2013). While it can be difficult to keep clear where Git ends and GitHub takes over, features of the underlying system are ascribed to Git and features of the web interface and cloud storage are ascribed to GitHub. 

Git (and, by extension, GitHub) represents a recent important innovation in collaboration architecture. Git creates a platform for disparate collaborators to contribute to a collective output without top-down coordination, using distributed version control and closely documenting every change made. Version control is a system that records changes to a computer file or set of files over time, lets a user revert back to a previous state, compare changes over time and precisely identify who did what. Distributed version control is a system in which every user creates a full copy of the target files. Git is the most widely used distributed version control system and also, as part of Torvalds’ vision, focuses on supporting distributed workflows, replacing coordination with a platform for collaboration (Spinellis 2012). As a platform for supporting open collaboration in public sector settings, Git allows for accountability in the evolution of digital products, identifying who was responsible for what and tracking the origins and influences of final products through their entire lifecycle.

Complete projects and their constituent files are organized in repositories or ‘repos’. These repos can be copied in their entirety (an action referred to as ‘forking’), for alternative objectives and applications, with forked repos developing independently in parallel to the original repo. Someone wishing to make a contribution to a repo will ‘issue a pull request’ (PRs) to bring to the attention of the document owner proposed changes to the original. Secure algorithms and ‘diff’ displays (with deleted items shown in red and added items shown in green) provide rich accountability and details of changes made between versions. The power of Git and GitHub is that everything is recorded and every change is attributed – potentially addressing a key problem of the e-government era by tracking and maintaining detailed records of changes in the evolution of documents. As an open collaboration platform, everything is open and transparent and shared by default for users of free accounts (with an option to pay for ‘private repos’). Built-in social networking features include the ability to monitor other repos and connect to other collaborators (Dabbish et al. 2012; Tsay, Dabbish and Herbsleb 2012; Storey et al. 2014; Tsay, Dabbish and Herbsleb 2013). Users can tag another username in an issue or comment and user profile pages provide details of a user’s activity helping to assess reputation and build a community of collaborators. Backend data collection and dashboard reporting features, including metrics ranging from the identity of contributors to the frequency of submissions, provide a foundation for analytics (Kalliamvakou et al. 2014; Marlow, Dabbish and Herbsleb 2013). (Box 1 places this jargon in the context of the briefing note process to illustrate how it might be used in public administration settings). 

<box 1 about here>
