Previous: [Methods](https://github.com/JSGS/CPA_paper/blob/master/methods.md)

#Data and Analysis
##Canadian Government Organizations on GitHub
The “Government GitHub Community” included twenty-five self-registered Canadian public sector organizations as of September 2014, with sixteen federal departments and agencies, six provincial/territorial governments and four local governments. Through the search methods described above, we found fifteen additional organizational accounts (for a total of n = 40), including seven federal agencies (n = 23), five provincial/territorial agencies (n = 10), two First Nations governments (n = 2) and one local government (n = 5). These organizations range from those currently active on GitHub to organizations that appear to have little activity other than having created an account (see table 1). If the number of public members for an organization is zero, that may either reflect a setting on the organization account (i.e., all members are hidden by default) or all members have themselves elected to remain hidden. Thus the total number of members is usually higher than the public number shown and obviously higher if the number of public members is zero. “Public repos” are the total number of repos publicly viewable, regardless of whether they were created by the organization or were forked from elsewhere (it cannot be known whether an organization with no public repos means that all repos are private and hidden, or that there are no repos of either kind in the account). The type of activity noted is based on the organizational description or the programming frameworks and languages used in the public repos. “Indeterminate” means that there is no publicly viewable activity upon which to judge the type of work being done within the organization account and no description was provided as to what the account’s purpose was. 

[table 1 about here](https://www.dropbox.com/s/34uve2fnma239q3/Table1.png?dl=0)

##Canadian Public Servants on GitHub
We found 180 GitHub accounts that, based on our search methods, we ascribe to a public servant in a Canadian government. We found a minority (37 per cent) used a government email address as their registered email on GitHub (from the survey data, 47 per cent of respondents said they used their government email address with their GitHub account). Additional email contact information was compiled using various Internet searches so that 60 per cent (n = 108) of the invitations were sent to government email address (the distribution of these email accounts by order of government is shown in figure 1, with employees working across federal [n = 98; 91 per cent], provincial/territorial [n = 6] and local governments [n = 4]). 

[figure 1 about here](https://www.dropbox.com/s/l4txc6rqm4e6uqz/Figure1.png?dl=0)

Account holders with private email addresses account for 32 per cent (n = 57) of the user accounts found. In the case of fifteen usernames (8 per cent), no email address could be found but a Twitter handle was found and a tweet was sent to that account. Using gender imputation based on given names (Cathles, Harrington and Krynski 2010), 21 per cent of the compiled list is female. 

GitHub data reports the total number of contributions made by the user in the past year (though this simple measure does not record whether the contribution was made to a government project or not, nor does it measure how significant the contribution was). For the 180 GitHub accounts collected, 95 (53 per cent) users showed no activity over the period June 9 2014 – June 9 2015. Contribution levels for the remaining users range from a low of 1 to a high of 2074, with a median value of just under 20. 

##Survey: GitHub User Perspectives
Respondents were asked about their level of experience using GitHub, Git and other version control systems, their self-evaluated level of expertise in GitHub, their role in influencing their workplace use of GitHub and their subjective belief in the value of GitHub as a collaborative tool. Note that, as responses to the survey were anonymous, no variables related to order of government, work role or demographic measures are available. 

Seventy-two per cent of respondents have some experience using Git from the command line, and 53 per cent have prior GitHub experience, indicating that the respondents have high levels of technical skill. When asked to subjectively evaluate their GitHub expertise, half the respondents considered themselves expert or fluent. However, 63 per cent claimed to have little or no influence on getting their workplace unit to use GitHub. In evaluating GitHub as a collaboration tool, 88 per cent were enthusiastic supporters, a value that should be read in the context of the respondents’ skill level. 

Pearson correlation coefficients were computed for all bivariate relationships in this category, though no correlations of significance between various measures of expertise and the respondents’ role in workplace adoption were found. However, higher scores on expertise were correlated with more favourable evaluations of GitHub’s usability and power—though whether experience leads to perceived usefulness, or usefulness encourages more use, we cannot say at this stage. 

When asked to describe their workplace organizational role when using GitHub (respondents were able to pick more than one role), they fell into one of two groups: coding related and other non-coding roles. Code maintainer (n=17, 53 per cent), code contributor (n=20, 63 per cent) and web developer (n=16, 50 per cent) were all highly correlated (r = 0.83 for code maintainer and code contributor; r = 0.69 for code maintainer and web developer; and r = 0.65 for code contributor and web developer; all significant at p < 0.01). However, non-code contributor (n=14, 44 per cent), project manager (n=13, 41 per cent) and interested observer/rare contributor (n=9, 28 per cent) were all uncorrelated appearing to represent separate categories. 

We asked respondents how their work unit currently uses GitHub and how they think it should be used in future. After selecting and categorizing these purposes, we then asked them to rank order these purposes in terms of importance (for current purposes) and priority (for future purposes). Items in table 2 are listed in order of the average ranking for all respondents. Different organizational work units clearly use GitHub for different purposes and order those uses differently in terms of importance and future priority. Code development (the purpose for which GitHub is built) is and will continue to be important, though respondents foresee increased use of GitHub for document writing and public consultation in future years. 

[table 2 about here](https://www.dropbox.com/s/31f68628hr8n8vr/table%202.png?dl=0)

Respondents were presented with nine statements and asked to indicate their agreement with the statement, ranging from strongly disagree (1) to strongly agree (7). These statements were presented in random order to survey respondents, but are listed in table 3 in order of agreement. 

[table 3 about here](https://www.dropbox.com/s/652sz2lp4j78r9p/Table3.png?dl=0)

Lastly, survey respondents had an open-ended opportunity to leave any additional feedback or observations that were not captured in the survey. GitHub was seen as a highly useful tool for addressing two pressing deliverables: responding effectively to freedom of information requests (a concern of governments in general) and providing public information in both official languages (of concern to bilingual governments in Canada in particular). Respondents also noted that staff are not encouraged to contribute to government projects outside their performance agreement and beyond their organizational unit, though some respondents noted that contributions are being made on the employee’s own time using their private account and personal ICT resources.

##Interviews: Leadership and Operational Management Perspectives
The purpose of the semi-structured interviews was to gain perspective from a small group of administrators that have interacted with GitHub in their work and from senior executives that were noted as being leaders in the use of collaborative tools. Our interviews addressed aspects of collaboration, GitHub adoption and use, the responses to which led to distinct themes:

###Perceptions of collaboration
We began each interview asking respondents to characterize their understanding of collaboration. The range of responses to this question reinforces previous findings that there are different interpretations of the concept of collaboration (Thompson, Perry and Miller 2008), though in these responses it was clear that collaboration was indicative of what the department or agency sought to accomplish using online tools. Three response themes emerged in this context: first, collaboration is seen as a mechanism for achieving efficiencies, e.g., facilitating the sharing of resources for adapting websites to reduce duplication of effort (the use of GitHub for coordinating work on the Web Experience Toolkit (WET) project led by the Treasury Board of Canada Secretariat (TBS) was the case commonly pointed to – see box 3); second, collaboration was understood as a way for separate departments within the Canadian federal government to communicate about information, resources and projects of joint interest; and third, collaboration was expressed as a new way of solving public problems, promoting innovation in public services and finding creative new ways of organizing work using knowledge and perspectives from both inside and outside of government.


___
*Box 3: The Web Experience Toolkit: Using GitHub as a Platform for Collaboration*

The “Web Experience Toolkit” or WET is an open source code library for building websites that are accessible, usable, interoperable, mobile friendly and multi-lingual. Deployed on GitHub (https://github.com/wet-boew), the library contains reusable components provided for free as open source software under an MIT licence for use by departments and external Web developers. WET conforms to the Web Content Accessibility Guidelines (version 2.0; see http://www.w3.org/TR/WCAG20) and eases compliance with the TBS standards on Web Accessibility (http://www.tbs-sct.gc.ca/ws-nw/wa-aw/index-eng.asp), Web Usability (http://www.tbs-sct.gc.ca/ws-nw/wu-fe/index-eng.asp) and Web Interoperability (http://www.tbs-sct.gc.ca/ws-nw/wi-iw/index-eng.asp). While TBS does not require the use of the WET library on federal websites, “[i]t is highly recommended for use on Government of Canada websites” (http://www.tbs-sct.gc.ca/ws-nw/wa-aw/wet-boew/index-eng.asp).

The WET initiative is led by the Treasury Board of Canada Secretariat, collaboratively developed and maintained by Government of Canada departments and external web communities, and is particularly remarkable for its agility and rapid development when compared to other government-led software projects (McMillan 2013a). Initiated in 2009 in response to a cross-departmental need for reusable web templates and components that would make it easier to implement website and web app requirements, the move to GitHub was prompted in part as a response to the Federal Court of Canada ruling in 2012 requiring the federal government make its websites accessible to disabled Canadians (see box 4). The WET is in use by developers around the world including provincial governments (e.g., Ontario.ca) and local governments (e.g., Hamilton.ca) in Canada (Boots 2013). Developers and interested supporters in the Web Experience Toolkit community meet annually in Ottawa at CodeFest (http://wet-boew.github.io/codefest) and the toolkit is continually being developed. 
___



###Adoption of online collaboration tools
Two themes emerged on GitHub adoption: first was the necessity to innovate based on exogenous forces, specifically a recent court ruling that found that federal government websites were in contravention of the Human Rights Act, which served as a catalyst for the government to find a solution that would make all websites across the federal government accessible to users with disabilities, to do so quickly, but to do so without a commensurate increase in resources (see box 4); second, that the public service in the Web 2.0 era has developed adaptive intrapreneurial strategies (Sharma and Chrisman 2007) for dealing with traditional bureaucratic structures. The agreement of the TBS legal department that the WET code could be provided as an open source project under the MIT licence (Henley and Kemp 2008) was cited by respondents as a major impetus for open collaboration in the Government of Canada. This significant change was made possible because the content of the WET was not contentious and there was strong management support and leadership for the innovation; and third, the use of certain tools like GitHub can grow organically by demonstrating success (as opposed to promoted tools such as GCPedia (a Wikimedia platform), GCConnex (a Facebook-like social networking service) and GCForums (a threaded discussion group), the important of which have faded according to two interview respondents), due in large part to the rigorous work of the implementation team to ensure the project’s success and the support of administrators with a background in computer coding and online tools who saw the value of GitHub and were interested in exploring the collaborative possibilities.


___
*Box 4: Jodhan v. Canada (Attorney General): A Legal Impetus for Innovation*

The Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms and the Canadian Human Rights Act, supplemented by provincial human rights acts, are the foundation upon which the legal bases for inclusive rights for those with disabilities in Canada are ensured (Prince 2009). Specifically, Section 15 of the Charter guarantees the equality of rights of Canadians, including Canadians with disabilities. Zaparyniuk and Montgomerie (2005) speculated several years ago that government websites inaccessible to those with disabilities could be subject to a section 15 Charter challenge and the case of Donna Jodhan has borne that out. 

Jodhan, a legally blind Toronto resident, sued the Government of Canada in 2006 because citizen services made available via federal websites were inaccessible to her, despite the use of screen reader technology and her own technical proficiency. The government argued that the accessibility of their websites and forms was not subject to a section 15 Charter ruling because the government provided alternative means of communication such as telephone, regular mail and in-person consultation. 

On February 9 2011, the Federal Court rejected the government’s arguments and found that the inaccessibility of government websites was a violation of Jodhan’s Charter equality rights. The ruling stated that the government had a constitutional obligation to make every website within the federal hierarchy accessible to disabled clients and gave the government 15 months to achieve this (see Jodhan v. Canada (Attorney General), [2012]. FCA 161 retrieved from http://www.canlii.org/en/ca/fct/doc/2010/2010fc1197/2010fc1197.html). 

The federal government subsequently appealed the decision. On May 30 2012, the Federal Court of Appeal unanimously rejected the federal government's appeal. However, the Federal Court ruling was amended to apply to the TBS only, removed the court’s supervision of the implementation of the decision and restricted the Charter implications of the ruling (see Canada (Attorney General) v. Jodhan, [2012] FCA 161 retrieved from http://www.canlii.org/en/ca/fca/doc/2012/2012fca161/2012fca161.html). Despite this setback (Council of Canadians with Disabilities 2013), the impact of the initial Federal Court ruling had already set in motion the series of events that would lead to the development of the Web Experience Toolkit (see box 3), implementing new TBS web standards on accessibility, usability and interoperability. 
___



###Management challenges
Respondents had mixed levels of expertise with GitHub, with the two staff members having greater hands-on experience than the three senior executives. Though the executive respondents with knowledge of GitHub spoke of its power as a collaborative tool, they did reflect on the difficulty in making the case among their colleagues as to the usefulness of collaboration tools in general and GitHub in particular. Respondents also noted the difficult position of middle managers with respect to open collaboration tools such as GitHub: while the senior leadership supports transformation, middle managers are resource constrained, have immediate deliverables and are made responsible to produce measurable outputs from their department or unit. This can have a dampening effect on collaborative efforts where the outcomes are attributed to another department – regardless of whether the benefits of that work are usable throughout the system. Lastly, performance management objectives can conflict with the desire of staff members to experiment with new technologies and to engage in government-wide projects with promising but uncertain outcomes when they are not recognized for their collaborative efforts that don’t align with their assigned tasks. Given these constraints, the fact that there was any activity in GitHub was explained in part by the general shift in attitude in the Canadian government towards collaboration over the past fifteen years and the use of techniques such as gamification (the URL for this source in July 2015 was http://wet-boew.github.io/codefest/codesprint-en.html) that serve to recognize contributors for their efforts (Kelley and Johnston 2012). 

Next: [Discussion](https://github.com/JSGS/CPA_paper/blob/master/discussion.md)
