Previous: [Data and Analysis](https://github.com/JSGS/CPA_paper/blob/master/data.md)

#Discussion
Reiterating our point that we are not interested in GitHub per se but rather what it might tell us about open collaboration generally, we focus here on two central points that emerge from the findings: that there is a noticeable lack of GitHub adoption and activity to date; and that a dichotomy between respondents with strong technical skills and those supporting an in-principle approach to collaboration is hampering adoption. 

##Few departments, few accounts
The lack of much GitHub presence in the Canadian public sector is notable, with very few government agencies having an active presence on GitHub compared to, e.g., Twitter. We listed a small number of government departments essentially experimenting with GitHub or perhaps just staking a presence, but even less real activity is evidenced among this group of early adopters. The active government departments that were found (other than the dominant Treasury Board work on the Web Experience Toolkit – see box 3) tend to have a strong scientific mission (e.g., Natural Resources Canada, Environment Canada, Agriculture Canada), were those agencies developing apps for service delivery (e.g., Industry Canada, Revenu Québec), or promoting open data initiatives (e.g., TBS Open Government initiative, City of Ottawa). For most of the remaining accounts, publicly viewable activity extended no further than having an account as a possible indicator of future intentions – a near zero-cost action with little risk. Some of these staked claims have been undertaken as unofficial acts without higher-level approval, indicating intrapreneurial attempts to establish a GitHub presence without waiting for official clearance (Mergel and Bretschneider 2013). For individual accounts held by public servants, most were found in the federal government at rates not unlike those found in broader society. Nonetheless, the GitHub community of users in the Canadian public sector is remarkably small and the average level of activity is low. Again, at these early days in GitHub experimentation, taking the step of signing up for a free GitHub account entails little risk but might indicate an affinity for the premise of open collaboration if not a deep understanding of GitHub mechanics (Forte and Bruckman 2008; Nov 2007). 

While federal departments and public servants on GitHub are few, provincial, territorial, First Nations and local governments are even scarcer. While much of the data in this paper comes from the federal public service, we present this paper as a study of the Canadian public sector generally in part because this relative absence of non-federal public servants on GitHub is part of the story. As has been noted elsewhere, despite the Westminster/Whitehall traditions that underlie federal and provincial governments in Canada, provincial policy analysts have limited autonomy compared to their federal counterparts and are more politically influenced (Howlett and Wellstead 2012; McArthur 2007). Local (Liu et al. 2010) and First Nations (Peredo et al. 2004) public servants are even more constrained in their degrees of freedom. Owing largely to the origins of the data, though taking as applicable these findings from related literature comparing the various orders of government in Canada, the findings described here should be interpreted with caution outside the federal setting, though the lack of much activity at sub-federal levels reflects the general thrust of the broader literature. 

##Respondent dichotomy

Our survey of public sector GitHub users suffered from a low response rate that is further coloured by the apparent self-selection of the GitHub users who did respond, with a majority reporting high levels of familiarity with the interface and underlying architecture. This should colour any interpretation of the responses of the survey respondents, particularly their support for expanding the use of GitHub into processes such as text collaboration where experience has shown both resistance to doing so and barriers that limit the involvement of non-technical participants.

There is also a split between the users of GitHub and the proponents of the principle of open collaboration, with leaders suggesting strong support and operational respondents citing an ambiguity between the rhetoric of open collaboration and the reality of traditional management approaches. Highly technical respondents also noted that they have very little influence on decisions such as the adoption of tools like GitHub. The evidence suggests that, in this case, adoption was influenced most by exogenous forces (see box 4) and well-placed intrapreneurs (e.g., the securing agreement to use the MIT licence to govern contributions to Government of Canada GitHub projects). 

From the interview data in which we spoke with a small number of federal government senior executives, there was general support for the idea of open collaboration but less enthusiasm for more widespread use of GitHub reflecting the appropriateness of that specific tool. These senior public servants also appreciated the dilemma that faced middle managers that may support open collaboration in principle but were reluctant to encourage their subordinates to contribute to other units’ deliverables. Thus, challenges facing the more widespread adoption of GitHub appear to rest on both the difficulty of the interface and the practical implications of pursuing open collaboration in a cross-governmental way. There are several theories that help explain the technology adoption process (e.g., the technology acceptance model [Davis 1989] that focuses on perceived usefulness and ease of use; and the unified theory of acceptance and use of technology that focuses on performance expectancy, effort expectancy, facilitating conditions and social influence [Venkatesh et al. 2003]) but the Theory of Planned Behavior (Ajzen 1991) seems most useful here in pointing to a weakness of perceived behavioural control – the actual ability to act on one’s attitudes and the organization’s norms – in linking the rhetoric of open collaboration with the day-to-day realities of public servants (Bock and Kim 2002; Kankanhalli, Tan and Wei 2005; Willem and Buelens 2007; Zhang, Cresswell and Thompson 2005). It is not enough to exhort public servants to openly collaborate; they must be given the framework and tools to do so.

Next: [Conclusion](https://github.com/JSGS/CPA_paper/blob/master/conclusion.md)
