previous: [Title Page](https://github.com/JSGS/CPA_paper/blob/master/titlepage.md)

#GitHub use in public administration in Canada: Early experience with a new open collaboration tool

To refer to the digital revolution as having had important impacts on society is to engage in droll understatement. Information and communication technologies (ICTs) and their application across a range of domains—throughout societies, markets and public governance—continue to have profound, disruptive and transformative effects. Among the many threads in this changing technology fabric, the Internet, the World Wide Web and its later evolution as Web 2.0 are strands where these impacts appear most visible. Sir Tim Berners-Lee’s (2000) quarter century-old vision for an interlinked system of servers and browsable documents has disrupted political systems, augmented technology mediated social interactions, up-ended markets, raised expectations for civic governance and transformed public administration (Fox and Rainie 2014). 

Consider just the impact of technology on the administration of government, where the label e-government (Layne and Lee 2001; West 2004; Harrison et al. 2011) has evolved towards Gov 2.0 (Osimo 2008; Chun et al. 2010) and digital era governance (Dunleavy et al. 2006; Dunleavy and Margetts 2010) and where digital services and ICTs have become an expected and regular feature of modern government (Fountain 2004; Chadwick 2009; Lips 2012). The ability to file tax returns over the Internet, to get location-based updates to public transit routes and schedules, to download and repurpose open government datasets or engage in instant communication with political leaders and with other citizens on public policy topics now seem commonplace (Noveck 2009; Harrison, Pardo and Cook 2012; Linders 2012; Nam 2012; Reddick and Turner 2012). 

We focus more precisely still here on how digital era governance is being forged in an internal organizational sense through the adoption of technology and changing norms, influencing interactions within the walls of governments as organizations evolving towards non-hierarchical, collaborative knowledge organizations. Intra-organizational collaboration involves people working together to address issues and solve problems that are too complex for any individual or department to handle on its own (Wood and Gray 1991; O’Toole 1997). Collaboration in government and elsewhere has expanded in recent years both as a function of the capabilities of digital technology—especially the emergence of Web 2.0 technologies as co-production tools (McAfee 2006; Wittke and Hanekop 2011)—and in response to shifting organization cultures (Fernandez and Rainey 2006), resource constraints, the challenge posed by complex problems requiring horizontal responses (6 2004) and general movement towards digital era governance (Dunleavy et al. 2006). 

These changes in the context and tools of internal interaction are affecting procedural, administrative and hierarchical arrangements within governments, particularly through online platforms that facilitate the sharing of knowledge and open collaboration among public servants for the collective production of outputs (Agranoff and McGuire 2011; Binz-Scharf, Lazer and Mergel 2012; Forte and Lampe 2013; Gil-Garcia, Chengalur-Smith and Duchessi 2007; Pardo and Tayi 2007; Weber and Khademian 2008; Willem and Buelens 2007; Yang and Maxwell 2011; Zhang and Dawes 2006; Zhang, Dawes and Sarkis 2005). In some cases the effect is to shift government structures from rigid hierarchies to flat, collaborative networks (Eggers 2007; Howlett 2002; Knoke 1990; McNutt 2006), reversing the tendency towards organizational siloing (Mergel 2011) and maximizing the potential contribution that all members of the organization might make to the organization’s goals through a collaborative architecture (Demil and Lecocq 2006; Dunleavy and Margetts 2000; Meijer and Thaens 2010; Mergel 2015; Page 2008). 

The principles and possibilities of technology-facilitated open collaboration derive from pioneering work in open source software development such as Linux and open collaboration systems like Wikipedia (Benkler 2006). While openness has both democratic as well as effectiveness foundations (Dahl 1991; Page 2008; Maier-Rabler and Huber 2011), open collaboration has been given new impetus through technology advances that have reduced the costs of communication, undermined previous rationales for centralization and closed coordination and raised expectations that new methods for supporting and making decisions can be developed. What collaborative tools share is a reversal of the locus of control inherent in traditional, closed information systems whether paper-based or computer facilitated. In a closed system, the roster of potential contributors is limited by the distribution list or those specifically granted access to the documents being developed. With open collaborative systems, the cast of potential contributors becomes much broader and undefined by the convenors (Ebersbach et al. 2008; Leuf and Cunningham 2001). 

The private sector has not missed the opportunity that organizational interest in open collaboration represents. The Web 2.0 enterprise collaboration software market has seen many competitors emerge in recent years, each promoting their approach for facilitating knowledge sharing and collaboration within organizations (Drakos, Mann and Sarner 2012). ‘Free’ platforms (Anderson 2009) like wikis allow for low-cost experimentation and commercial platforms are jostling for market share in a volatile field. Social media platforms such as Facebook and Twitter are being adapted for ad hoc internal knowledge sharing and communication (Mergel 2011, 2012). Within this catalogue, the specific tool we focus on here, one that has generated increasing attention in recent years (McMillan 2012), is GitHub (http://github.com), a digital-project web service primarily used for software development projects (Begel, Bosch and Storey 2013; Gousios, Pinzger and van Deursen 2013; Peterson 2013; Storey et al. 2014). 

Our focus on GitHub has been influenced by the work of researchers and other observers who are increasingly paying attention to the use of this platform for purposes other than software coding and web development, with a class of non-code social collaboration applications variously referred to as text, documents or prose (Longo and Kelley 2015; Lowry, Curtis and Lowry 2004; Voelter 2013; Zagalsky et al. 2015). As the uses and users of GitHub move beyond its original core community of software developers, the present and potential impact on fields such as social knowledge creation (Arbuckle et al. 2014), open science (Bartling and Friesike 2014), open collaboration (Mergel 2014) and open governance (Shirky 2012) warrants consideration of the conditions under which GitHub can facilitate collaboration in non-code domains. 

Despite the growing interest in GitHub, there is currently limited research on the use of GitHub in public sector organizations (Kim and Teo 2013; Mergel 2014) and an absence of any systematic study of the use of GitHub in Canadian public sector settings. We  present an exploratory view of this new tool for open collaboration as it is being experimented with in Canadian public administration. We have not sought to evaluate GitHub as a collaboration tool (something that will emerge with its further modification and use), but rather explore how this particular collaboration tool, rooted in the open source software culture of openness and peer production, is being used in the Canadian public sector and what the implications of further use of GitHub might be for the future of open collaboration among public servants in Canada. As a text collaboration platform, GitHub presents many challenges that caution against its widespread adoption. But it is of interest because it represents a difference-of-kind in collaborative platforms, not just a difference-of-degree, owing largely to the underlying computer architecture it is built on. As both an example of a new approach to open collaboration, and because of the unique features that GitHub brings, our interest is two-fold: to assess why and how this particular tool is being adopted in Canadian public sector settings and what the unique approach that GitHub offers might mean for the future of open collaboration in public administration. As a study in early-stage technology diffusion (Rogers 2010), our objective is to assess the adoption process of experimentation and begin to track movements toward the development of norms and formal rules (Mergel and Bretschneider 2013). 

We start with a description of the GitHub platform and then describe our methods for undertaking this exploratory investigation of how GitHub is currently being experimented with in Canadian public sector settings. From our analysis of a scan and survey of public sector GitHub users, and supplemented by insights from interviews with operational and executive leaders exploring the potential for open collaboration and open innovation in the federal government, we assess the current use of GitHub in Canadian public administration settings. We conclude with how this particular innovation might spread in the Canadian public sector context, what barriers stand in the way of its further adoption, what value GitHub may have for practicing public administrators and what the implications of this particular approach to open collaboration might be in future.

Next: [Context](https://github.com/JSGS/CPA_paper/blob/master/context.md)
