Previous: [Box 1](https://github.com/JSGS/CPA_paper/blob/master/box1.md)

#Methods

This exploratory study develops a cross sectional picture of GitHub use in Canadian public administration. Data for this study was collected in the summer and autumn of 2014 using publicly available data on GitHub supplemented by Internet-based searches, an online survey of public servants in Canada found to have a GitHub user account and semi-structured interviews with two public service leaders in the GitHub space and three senior executives with knowledge of collaboration generally and GitHub in particular. 

##Sample: Organizations and Individuals

We identified Canadian public sector organizations with a GitHub organizational or user account, beginning with the voluntary “Government GitHub Community” (https://government.github.com/community/) where official government institutions are invited to add their organization to the community list curated by GitHub. We added to this organization-level list using the advanced search function via the GitHub interface (https://github.com/search/advanced), searching first for departments and agencies in the Government of Canada (first using the terms “Canada” and “Canadian” then scanning the results; then searching by name and acronym for ministries and agencies listed in http://www.canada.ca/en/gov/dept/index.html), Canadian provincial and territorial governments and ministries (e.g., searching first for the name of the province or territory; where that yielded a large number of results, or the result was unclear, further searches were conducted by combining terms such as “ministry”, “government”, “province” / “territory” with the name of each province or territory), First Nations governments (e.g., searching the full name of accounts using the phrases “First Nation”, “Indian Chiefs” and “Indian Nation”) and the twenty-five largest cities by population in Canada (the URL for this list in July 2015 was http://www12.statcan.gc.ca/census-recensement/2011/dp-pd/hlt-fst/pd-pl/Table-Tableau.cfm?LANG=Eng&T=301&S=3&O=D also available through http://bit.ly/1MDO8dT). These searches yielded forty-one Canadian public sector organizations on GitHub (see table 1, below) and are current as of the end of 2014. 

We then sought to identify Canadian pubic sector employees with a GitHub account. A first list of candidate usernames was assembled based on membership in the above organizations and contributions to the repositories within organizational accounts. That initial list of users generated further sample candidates through the GitHub users they follow and those that follow them (the GitHub “follow” feature is similar to, e.g., “following” a user in Twitter). Additional candidates were tentatively identified by scanning the list of users “watching” and “starring” active repositories in the identified organizational accounts (watching and starring in GitHub are features similar to bookmarking a webpage). This process was repeated until no additional candidate names were found. In all cases, candidate usernames were evaluated to determine their public service status. Where a user self-identified as a public servant on their GitHub profile or through their use of a government email address, they were retained in the list. In many cases, however, further investigation was required including searching for the user in a government directory or through an Internet search engine. Usernames that could not be authenticated as a public servant, or were clearly identified otherwise as not a public servant, were deleted. These searches of GitHub usernames belonging to individuals with the status of public servant in a Canadian federal, provincial, territorial, First Nations or local government yielded 180 individuals and is current as of August 31 2014. 

We are confident that we compiled a representative listing of Canadian government organizations with a presence on GitHub and of public servants in Canada with a GitHub account having some connection to the list of organizational accounts we found. Beyond that qualified statement, we cannot know how accurately we have surveyed the range of public servants, governments, ministries, departments and agencies that are present on GitHub. Were an agency to create its organizational account using a non-standard organization name or acronym, with no other identifying information, they would likely not have been revealed in our searches. And doubtless there are also more public servants in Canada who have a presence on GitHub than our search methods revealed given the informal way that GitHub use is regulated in the Canadian public sector (see box 2 below). 

___
*Box 2: GitHub User Accounts in the Canadian Public Sector*

Compiling an exploratory view of the GitHub landscape in the Canadian public sector at this early stage was complicated by the informal way that Canadian governments manage GitHub use by employees. In the United States federal context, public sector users are more easily identified through the “Government GitHub Community” (Mergel 2014), strengthened through the GitHub Terms of Service and federal employee regulations. Amendment Terms of Service applicable to all government users issued in late 2014 (see the archived page at http://web.archive.org/web/20141231000000*/https://help.github.com/articles/amendment-to-github-terms-of-service-applicable-to-government-users) required employees of any government or public entity to register using their official government email address. These Terms were subsequently amended following an exchange between the authors and GitHub to apply only to users that are using GitHub on behalf of a United States federal government agency (see https://help.github.com/articles/amendment-to-github-terms-of-service-applicable-to-u-s-federal-government-users/). For all public sector employees outside that definition, the standard terms of service apply (https://help.github.com/articles/github-terms-of-service/). The U.S. federal government also required (prior to the GitHub Terms of Service being amended) that an employee engaging in government work on GitHub attach their official email address to their account (an archived version of this requirement was at http://gsa.github.io/open-data-program-template/pages/account_management.html in late 2014 though no longer exists; the GitHub file that populated that page was accessed at https://github.com/GSA/open-data-program-template/blob/gh-pages/_site/pages/account_management.html in July 2015). No such requirements exist for Government of Canada public servants, either in the standard GitHub Terms of Service or, e.g., in the TBS “Policy on Acceptable Network and Device Use” (Canada 2013). A search of provincial government public service agency websites did not reveal any GitHub-specific policies. 

In our sample of public servants in Canadian governments with a public account on GitHub, we found a minority (37 per cent) used a government email address, though 47 per cent of survey respondents said they used a government email address as part of their GitHub registration. Thus, an automated process to collect usernames based on government email addresses alone (e.g., https://github.com/benbalter/gman) would likely undercount more than half of potential respondents. 
___


##Survey

Our survey was designed to collect information and opinions from Canadian public servants with a public profile on GitHub who use that account in conjunction with their official duties. Using the list of Canadian public service GitHub users compiled, an invitation to complete the survey was emailed to potential respondents in mid September 2014. A small number of bounces (three) were received and some recipients reported being unable to access the online survey from behind the government firewall though they often persisted by completing the survey on their home device. Thirty-two complete surveys were retained (forty-five respondents started the survey, but incomplete surveys were discarded), for a response rate of approximately 18 per cent. This is certainly a low response rate and the results of the survey should be read in light of this. Our attempt to comprehensively create an inclusive database of Canadian public servants with a presence on GitHub, as described above in our sampling method, will have included many GitHub users whose only activity on the site was to have created a free user account (see data below on the number of contributions across our list of users). The low response rate may be further complicated by a non-response error on the part of less-involved GitHub users, biasing the results towards active GitHub users. As an exploratory study of the current and possible future uses of GitHub in Canadian public administration, the responses of active users offer a deeper understanding of GitHub, though these responses should not be considered representative of the community of public servants in Canada. 

Using the online survey platform Qualtrics, the survey contained nine questions designed to measure: the respondent’s experience and expertise using GitHub and similar platforms; their role in their organization with respect to GitHub; their uses for GitHub (including code development, website development and text document writing or prose); and their level of agreement with a number of statements as to possible barriers to GitHub’s use in their workplace as well as its suitability to specific tasks (the survey can be found at http://bit.ly/githubsurveyarchive). All responses were anonymous when submitted with no data captured on organizational affiliation, order of government, or respondent position in the public sector (neither with respect to position in the hierarchy or professional specialization). Response data was downloaded from the Qualtrics server and the original data deleted. Data was analyzed in Excel to compile descriptive and aggregate statistics and compute bivariate correlations between variables. No multivariate modelling of the variables was undertaken at this exploratory stage.

##Interviews

Telephone and web video interviews were conducted with five Government of Canada public servants, two of whom have direct connection to the use of GitHub as a collaborative tool in government and three of whom are senior public service executives with experience and interest in pan-organizational collaboration and collaborative tools and who were identified by colleagues as being at the forefront in promoting new technologies to enhance knowledge sharing and collaboration in government. Initial interview candidates were identified based on our sample described above, with additional candidates identified using snowball methods where interviewees suggesting additional candidates (Babbie 2012). While we connected with public servants in provincial governments, no one from orders of government other than the federal level agreed to be interviewed. Each interview was scheduled for thirty minutes, with both authors participating as interviewers. The interviews were not recorded, though each of the interviewers kept close hand-written and keyboarded notes during the interview, and a common record was added to by both immediately following the interviews and a post-interview discussion between the authors. An interview protocol served to guide the discussions (see http://bit.ly/githubinterviewsarchive). We explored perceptions and experiences on the questions of open collaboration and innovation within government, on efforts to open governance beyond the confines of government and on new forms of collaboration technology with a specific focus on the GitHub platform.

Next: [Data and Analysis](https://github.com/JSGS/CPA_paper/blob/master/data.md)
